---
title: "Restoring A Hammond X5"
date: 2022-04-20T14:58:20+01:00
draft: true
tags:
- electronics
- theatre
---


For an upcoming production of Carrie - The Musical, I acquired a Hammond X5.
It was *very* broken, but I fixed it!
Here's how.

## The Organ

The Hammond X5 is an electric organ, aiming to replicate the timeless sound of the classic B3 organ.
The B3 operates using *tonewheels* - mechanical disks that spin and generate small electric signals in pickups (the manner in which this occurs is not too far off how an electric guitar works).

These individual tones are then piped off to switches in the keyboard's manuals, then onwards to the tonebars, which mix the various harmonics associated with each key together into a blended sound.

The B3 family of organs, whilst very characterful in sound, are absolutely huge, and require regular oiling and maintenance. And in what kind of crazy world does a musical instrument need a *starter motor*?

### Transistor Hammonds

In the 1970s, Hammond started selling transistor-based clones of their tonewheel design. These were cheaper and lighter than the tonewheel models, using banks of electronic oscillators to generate their tones instead of the heavy mechanical gears.
To simplify the design further, only the top octave of notes are generated directly, by taking verious integer divisions of a high-frequency master clock. The rest are derived by dividing the frequency in two repeatedly. For example, A4 (440Hz) could be generated by dividing A8 (7040Hz) four times over. Along the way you would also generate A7, A6 and A5.

This system is not too dissimilar to the gear ratio system inside a tonewheel Hammond, which ensured all the tonewheels were perfectly in tune with each other.

## Known Issues

I picked up this X5 relatively cheaply on *Reverb* and my dad generously brought it down from Reading to Oxford for me.
Pretty much as soon as I started playing the organ at home, I notices none of the C# keys would sound. Actually, this was not quite right - if the mutation tonebars (all the black ones as well as the brown 5 1/3' tonebar) were pulled out, the C# keys would sound, but only on those mutations, leading to an odd, hollow sound. 

It's worth noting at this point that the mutation tonebars play harmonics that are 'borrowed' from other notes. For example, if the C#4 key is depressed with the 3rd harmonic (2 2/3') tonebar drawn, the resultant tone is an octave and a fifth up from C#4, i.e. G#5. It's no surprise then that the mutation tonebars still sound even if all the C#s are broken.
Similarly, any notes with mutation stops that borrow frequencies from the C# tone generator were missing those mutations (for example the 2 2/3' tonebar on F# would not sound, as the third harmonic of F# is C#).




